README.md, before:

# MEBOW_ResNet
### ResNet model for Human Body Orientation Estimation
## Introduction
This is a ResNet implementation for [*MEBOW: Monocular Estimation of Body Orientation In the Wild*](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2020/papers/Wu_MEBOW_Monocular_Estimation_of_Body_Orientation_in_the_Wild_CVPR_2020_paper.pdf).

In the original work, COCO-MEBOW (Monocular Estimation of Body Orientation in the Wild), a new large-scale dataset for orientation estimation from a single in-the-wild image was presented. Based on COCO-MEBOW, a simple baseline model for human body orientation estimation was established using an HRNet backbone and ResNet head. This repo provides the code for the original model as well as an implementation of vanilla ResNet for testing purposes.

## Quick start
### Installation
1. Install pytorch >= v1.0.0 following [official instruction](https://pytorch.org/).
2. Clone this repo, and we'll call the directory that you cloned as ${HBOE_ROOT}.
3. Install dependencies:
   ```
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
4. Install [COCOAPI](https://github.com/cocodataset/cocoapi):
   ```
   # COCOAPI=/path/to/clone/cocoapi
   git clone https://github.com/cocodataset/cocoapi.git $COCOAPI
   cd $COCOAPI/PythonAPI
   # Install into global site-packages
   make install
   # Alternatively, if you do not have permissions or prefer
   # not to install the COCO API into global site-packages
   python3 setup.py install --user
   ```
   Note that instructions like # COCOAPI=/path/to/install/cocoapi indicate that you should pick a path where you'd like to have the software cloned and then set an environment variable (COCOAPI in this case) accordingly.
5. Init output(training model output directory) and log(tensorboard log directory) directory:

   ```
   mkdir output 
   mkdir log
   ```

   Your directory tree should look like this:

   ```
   ${HBOE_ROOT}
   ├── config
   ├── core
   ├── data
   ├── experiments
   ├── images
   ├── log
   ├── models
   ├── output
   ├── tools
   ├── utils
   ├── .gitignore
   ├── index.md
   ├── README.md
   ├── requirements.txt
   └── resnet_train.py
   ```

6. Download pretrained models from the model zoo provided by [HRnet](https://github.com/leoxiaobin/deep-high-resolution-net.pytorch)([GoogleDrive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1hOTihvbyIxsm5ygDpbUuJ7O_tzv4oXjC?usp=sharing) or [OneDrive](https://1drv.ms/f/s!AhIXJn_J-blW231MH2krnmLq5kkQ))
   ```
   ${HBOE_ROOT}
    `-- models
        `-- pose_hrnet_w32_256x192.pth
   ```
  
### Data preparation
**For MEBOW dataset**, please download images, bbox and keypoints annotation from [COCO download](http://cocodataset.org/#download). Please email <czw390@psu.edu> to get access to human body orientation annotation.
Put them under {HBOE_ROOT}/data, and make them look like this:
```
${HBOE_ROOT}
|-- data
`-- |-- coco
    `-- |-- annotations
        |   |-- train_hoe.json
        |   |-- val_hoe.json
        |   |-- person_keypoints_train2017.json
        |   `-- person_keypoints_val2017.json
        `-- images
            |-- train2017
            |   |-- 000000000009.jpg
            |   |-- 000000000025.jpg
            |   |-- 000000000030.jpg
            |   |-- ... 
            `-- val2017
                |-- 000000000139.jpg
                |-- 000000000285.jpg
                |-- 000000000632.jpg
                |-- ... 
```
**For TUD dataset**, please download images from [the web page of TUD](https://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/departments/computer-vision-and-machine-learning/research/people-detection-pose-estimation-and-tracking/monocular-3d-pose-estimation-and-tracking-by-detection). The page also provides 8-bin orientation annotation. Continuous orientation annotation for TUD dataset can be found from [here](http://www.kotahara.com/publications.html). We provide our precessed TUD annotation from [here](https://pennstateoffice365-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/czw390_psu_edu/EqU8hWh-NgFOoNmIBEgE5RYBn61ZsFudKHCgbEH9-_V9DA?e=PZzshY).
Put TUD images and our processed annotation under {HBOE_ROOT}/data, and make them look like this:
```
${HBOE_ROOT}
|-- data
`-- |-- tud
    `-- |-- annot
        |   |-- train_tud.pkl
        |   |-- val_tud.pkl
        |   `-- test_tud.pkl
        `-- images
            |-- train
            |-- validate
            `-- test
```
### Trained HBOE model
We also provide the trained HBOE model (MEBOW as training set). ([OneDrive](https://pennstateoffice365-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/czw390_psu_edu/EoXLPTeNqHlCg7DgVvmRrDgB_DpkEupEUrrGATpUdvF6oQ?e=CQQ2KY))
### Training and Testing

#### Training original model on MEBOW dataset
```
python tools/train.py --cfg experiments/coco/segm-4_lr1e-3.yaml
```
#### Training ResNet model on MEBOW dataset
```
python resnet_train.py --cfg experiments/coco/resnet_train.yaml
```
#### Training original model on TUD dataset
```
python tools/train.py --cfg experiments/tud/lr1e-3.yaml
```
#### Testing on MEBOW dataset
You should change TEST:MODEL_FILE to your own in "experiments/coco/segm-4_lr1e-3.yaml". If you want to test with our trained HBOE model, specify TEST:MODEL_FILE with the downloaded model path.
```
python tools/test.py --cfg experiments/coco/segm-4_lr1e-3.yaml
```
### Acknowledgement
This repo is a fork from the original work on [MEBOW](https://github.com/ChenyanWu/MEBOW).
The original repo is based on [HRnet](https://github.com/leoxiaobin/deep-high-resolution-net.pytorch).

### Citation
If you use the MEBOW dataset or models in your research, please cite with:
```
@inproceedings{wu2020mebow,
  title={MEBOW: Monocular Estimation of Body Orientation In the Wild},
  author={Wu, Chenyan and Chen, Yukun and Luo, Jiajia and Su, Che-Chun and Dawane, Anuja and Hanzra, Bikramjot and Deng, Zhuo and Liu, Bilan and Wang, James Z and Kuo, Cheng-hao},
  booktitle={Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition},
  pages={3451--3461},
  year={2020}
}
```

Commit message:

Add documentation section, update README

README.md, after:

# MEBOW_ResNet
### ResNet model for Human Body Orientation Estimation
## Introduction
This is a ResNet implementation for [*MEBOW: Monocular Estimation of Body Orientation In the Wild*](https://openaccess.thecvf.com/content_CVPR_2020/papers/Wu_MEBOW_Monocular_Estimation_of_Body_Orientation_in_the_Wild_CVPR_2020_paper.pdf). This variation of the original MEBOW work was done as part of a final project for EECS 731: Intro to Data Science, instructed by Dr. Hongyang Sun at The University of Kansas. See the `doc` folder for more information.

In the original work, COCO-MEBOW (Monocular Estimation of Body Orientation in the Wild), a new large-scale dataset for orientation estimation from a single in-the-wild image was presented. Based on COCO-MEBOW, a simple baseline model for human body orientation estimation was established using an HRNet backbone and ResNet head. This repo provides the code for the original model as well as an implementation of vanilla ResNet for testing purposes.

## Quick start
### Installation
1. Install pytorch >= v1.0.0 following [official instruction](https://pytorch.org/).
2. Clone this repo, and we'll call the directory that you cloned as ${HBOE_ROOT}.
3. Install dependencies:
   ```
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
4. Install [COCOAPI](https://github.com/cocodataset/cocoapi):
   ```
   # COCOAPI=/path/to/clone/cocoapi
   git clone https://github.com/cocodataset/cocoapi.git $COCOAPI
   cd $COCOAPI/PythonAPI
   # Install into global site-packages
   make install
   # Alternatively, if you do not have permissions or prefer
   # not to install the COCO API into global site-packages
   python3 setup.py install --user
   ```
   Note that instructions like # COCOAPI=/path/to/install/cocoapi indicate that you should pick a path where you'd like to have the software cloned and then set an environment variable (COCOAPI in this case) accordingly.
5. Init output(training model output directory) and log(tensorboard log directory) directory:

   ```
   mkdir output 
   mkdir log
   ```

   Your directory tree should look like this:

   ```
   ${HBOE_ROOT}
   ├── config
   ├── core
   ├── data
   ├── experiments
   ├── images
   ├── log
   ├── models
   ├── output
   ├── tools
   ├── utils
   ├── .gitignore
   ├── index.md
   ├── README.md
   ├── requirements.txt
   └── resnet_train.py
   ```

6. Download pretrained models from the model zoo provided by [HRnet](https://github.com/leoxiaobin/deep-high-resolution-net.pytorch)([GoogleDrive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1hOTihvbyIxsm5ygDpbUuJ7O_tzv4oXjC?usp=sharing) or [OneDrive](https://1drv.ms/f/s!AhIXJn_J-blW231MH2krnmLq5kkQ))
   ```
   ${HBOE_ROOT}
    `-- models
        `-- pose_hrnet_w32_256x192.pth
   ```
  
### Data preparation
**For MEBOW dataset**, please download images, bbox and keypoints annotation from [COCO download](http://cocodataset.org/#download). Please email <czw390@psu.edu> to get access to human body orientation annotation.
Put them under {HBOE_ROOT}/data, and make them look like this:
```
${HBOE_ROOT}
|-- data
`-- |-- coco
    `-- |-- annotations
        |   |-- train_hoe.json
        |   |-- val_hoe.json
        |   |-- person_keypoints_train2017.json
        |   `-- person_keypoints_val2017.json
        `-- images
            |-- train2017
            |   |-- 000000000009.jpg
            |   |-- 000000000025.jpg
            |   |-- 000000000030.jpg
            |   |-- ... 
            `-- val2017
                |-- 000000000139.jpg
                |-- 000000000285.jpg
                |-- 000000000632.jpg
                |-- ... 
```
**For TUD dataset**, please download images from [the web page of TUD](https://www.mpi-inf.mpg.de/departments/computer-vision-and-machine-learning/research/people-detection-pose-estimation-and-tracking/monocular-3d-pose-estimation-and-tracking-by-detection). The page also provides 8-bin orientation annotation. Continuous orientation annotation for TUD dataset can be found from [here](http://www.kotahara.com/publications.html). We provide our precessed TUD annotation from [here](https://pennstateoffice365-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/czw390_psu_edu/EqU8hWh-NgFOoNmIBEgE5RYBn61ZsFudKHCgbEH9-_V9DA?e=PZzshY).
Put TUD images and our processed annotation under {HBOE_ROOT}/data, and make them look like this:
```
${HBOE_ROOT}
|-- data
`-- |-- tud
    `-- |-- annot
        |   |-- train_tud.pkl
        |   |-- val_tud.pkl
        |   `-- test_tud.pkl
        `-- images
            |-- train
            |-- validate
            `-- test
```
### Trained HBOE model
We also provide the trained HBOE model (MEBOW as training set). ([OneDrive](https://pennstateoffice365-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/czw390_psu_edu/EoXLPTeNqHlCg7DgVvmRrDgB_DpkEupEUrrGATpUdvF6oQ?e=CQQ2KY))
### Training and Testing

#### Training original model on MEBOW dataset
Note: Gaussian blur, histogram equalization, and unsharp masking may all be applied by modifying the PREPROCESSING section in a config file
```
python tools/train.py --cfg experiments/coco/segm-4_lr1e-3.yaml
```
#### Training ResNet model on MEBOW dataset
```
python resnet_train.py --cfg experiments/coco/resnet_train.yaml
```
#### Training original model on TUD dataset
```
python tools/train.py --cfg experiments/tud/lr1e-3.yaml
```
#### Testing on MEBOW dataset
You should change TEST:MODEL_FILE to your own in "experiments/coco/segm-4_lr1e-3.yaml". If you want to test with our trained HBOE model, specify TEST:MODEL_FILE with the downloaded model path.
```
python tools/test.py --cfg experiments/coco/segm-4_lr1e-3.yaml
```
### Acknowledgement
This repo is a fork from the original work on [MEBOW](https://github.com/ChenyanWu/MEBOW).
The original repo is based on [HRnet](https://github.com/leoxiaobin/deep-high-resolution-net.pytorch).

### Citation
If you use the MEBOW dataset or models in your research, please cite with:
```
@inproceedings{wu2020mebow,
  title={MEBOW: Monocular Estimation of Body Orientation In the Wild},
  author={Wu, Chenyan and Chen, Yukun and Luo, Jiajia and Su, Che-Chun and Dawane, Anuja and Hanzra, Bikramjot and Deng, Zhuo and Liu, Bilan and Wang, James Z and Kuo, Cheng-hao},
  booktitle={Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition},
  pages={3451--3461},
  year={2020}
}
```
